Document CLI extensibility (#2472)
kyma-project/cli: docs/extensibility/actions.md

name: ${{ .flags.name.value }}
```

### Custom functions

It's possible to call custom CLI function allowing to make some things easier:

| Function | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **newLineIndent** | Adds given indent to string if it's multiline | `source: ${{ .flags.source.value \| newLineIndent 20 }}` |
| **toEnvs** | Converts map of input data to array of kubernetes-like envs | `envs: ${{ .flags.env.value \| toEnvs }}` |
| **toArray** | Converts map of input data to array in given format. Use `{{.key}}` and `{{.value}}` to access map data | `secretMounts: ${{ .flags.secretmount.value \| toArray "{'secretName':'{{.key}}','mountPath':'{{.value}}'}" }}` |

## Available resource oriented actions

| Name | Description |
| --- | --- |
| **resource_create** | Create resource on a cluster |
| **resource_get** | Get resource/s on a cluster |
| **resource_delete** | Delete resource on a cluster |
| **resource_explain** | Explain resource by displaying info aboit it |

### resource_create

This action can be used to create any resource on the cluster.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
resource: {}
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **resource** | object | Raw object that should be applied to the cluster |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **resource** | object | Raw object that must be applied to the cluster |
```

> >NOTE: [example](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L81-L149) usage of the action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> For the action usage example, see [kyma-commands.yaml](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L81-L149).
```

### resource_get

> This action can be used to get/list resources in one kind from the clsuter. Output resources are displayed as kubectl-like table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this action to get or list resources of one kind from the cluster. Output resources are displayed as a kubectl-like table.
```

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
fromAllNamespaces: false
resource:
  apiVersion: "..."
  kind: "..."
  metadata:
    name: "..."
    namespace: "..."
outputParameters:
- resourcePath: '...'
  name: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **fromAllNamespaces** | bool | Determine if resources should be get from all namespaces |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **fromAllNamespaces** | bool | Determines if resources must be taken from all namespaces |
```

| **resource.apiVersion** | string | Output resources ApiVersion |
| **resource.kind** | string | Output resources Kind |

> | **resource.metadata.name** | string | Name of the resource to get. Gets all resources in the namespace if empty |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **resource.metadata.name** | string | Name of the resource to get. If empty, it gets all resources in the namespace. |
```

> | **resource.metadata.namespace** | string | Namespace from which resources will be obtained |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **resource.metadata.namespace** | string | Namespace from which resources are obtained |
```

| **outputParameters[]** | array | List of additional parameters displayed in the table view |
| **outputParameters[].name** | string | Additional column name |

> | **outputParameters[].resourcePath** | string | Path in the resource from which the value will be obtained. Supports [JQ](https://jqlang.org/) language |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **outputParameters[].resourcePath** | string | Path in the resource from which the value is obtained. Supports the [JQ](https://jqlang.org/) language |
```

> >NOTE: [example](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L7-L43) usage of the action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> For the action usage example, see [kyma-commands.yaml](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L7-L43).
```

### resource_delete

> This action can be used to delete resource from the clsuter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this action to delete a resource from the cluster.
```

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
resource:
  apiVersion: "..."
  kind: "..."
  metadata:
    name: "..."
    namespace: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **resource.apiVersion** | string | Resources ApiVersion |
| **resource.kind** | string | Resources Kind |
| **resource.metadata.name** | string | Name of the resource to delete |
| **resource.metadata.namespace** | string | Namespace of the resource to delete |

> >NOTE: [example](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L61-L79) usage of the action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> For the action usage example, see [kyma-commands.yaml](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L61-L79).
```

### resource_explain

> Display explanation note about the resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this action to display an explanatory note about the resource.
```

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
output: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **output** | string | Note to display |

> >NOTE: [example](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L45-L58) usage of the action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> For the action usage example, see [kyma-commands.yaml](https://github.com/kyma-project/serverless/blob/98b03d4d5f721564ade3e22a446c737aed17d0bf/config/serverless/files/kyma-commands.yaml#L45-L58).
```

> ## Available module oriented actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Available Module-Oriented Actions
```

| Name | Module | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **registry_image_import** | `docker-registry` | Import image from local registry to in-cluster docker registry |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **registry_image_import** | `docker-registry` | Import image from local registry to in-cluster Docker registry |
```

## Go Templates

Any field in the `with` object supports [go-templates](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) with all built-in features like [functions](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template#hdr-Functions) or [actions](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template#hdr-Actions). This allows access to values from args and flags. For more information, see  [Inputs](./inputs.md#go-templates).

All templates start with the `${{` prefix and end with the `}}` suffix. For example:

```yaml
name: ${{ .flags.name.value }}
```

### Custom Functions

| Function | For Type | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **newLineIndent** | string | Adds given indent to string if it's multiline | `source: ${{ .flags.source.value \| newLineIndent 20 }}` |
| **toEnvs** | map | Converts the input data map to array of Kubernetes-like envs | `envs: ${{ .flags.env.value \| toEnvs }}` |
| **toArray** | map | Converts the input data map to an array in a given format. Use `{{.key}}` and `{{.value}}` to access map data | `secretMounts: ${{ .flags.secretmount.value \| toArray "{'secretName':'{{.key}}','mountPath':'{{.value}}'}" }}` |

## Available Resource-Oriented Actions

| Name | Description |
| --- | --- |

> | **resource_create** | Creates a resource on a cluster |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **resource_create** | Creates a resource in a cluster |
```

| **resource_get** | Gets a resource from a cluster |
| **resource_delete** | Deletes a resource from a cluster |
| **resource_explain** | Explains a resource by displaying info about it |

### resource_create

> Use this action to create any resource on the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this action to create any cluster resource.
```

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
resource: {...}
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **resource** | object | Raw object that must be applied to the cluster |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **resource** | object | Raw object applied to a cluster |
```

## Available Module-Oriented Actions

| Name | Module | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **registry_image_import** | `docker-registry` | Import image from local registry to in-cluster Docker registry |
| **registry_config** | `docker-registry` | Get in-cluster registry configuration |
| **function_init** | `serverless` | Generate Function's source and dependencies locally |

### registry_image_import

Action designed for the `docker-registry` module to import image from a local registry to the in-cluster docker registry.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
image: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **image** | string | Image from local registry to import in format \<image\>:\<tag\> |

### registry_config

Action designed for the `docker-registry` module to get in-cluster Docker Config JSON.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
pushRegAddrOnly: false
pullRegAddrOnly: false
output: "..."
useExternal: false
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **pushRegAddrOnly** | bool | Return the push registry address only |
| **pullRegAddrOnly** | bool | Return the pull registry address only |

> | **output** | string | Path to the file to write output to insead of printing it on the terminal |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **output** | string | Path to the file to write output to instead of printing it in the terminal |
```

> | **useExternal** | bool | Use extenal configuration instead of internal one |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **useExternal** | bool | Use external configuration instead of internal one |
```

# Actions

## Overview

Actions are the base functionality of every executable command. They determine the procedure that the command runs on execution. Every action expects a specific configuration under the `.with` field. They are designed to cover most common and generic cases, such as CRUD operations (create, read, update, delete) and module-oriented operations (like importing images to the in-cluster registry for the `docker-registry` module).

> [!NOTE]

> > For the in-code definition, see [alpha.go](https://github.com/kyma-project/cli/blob/main/internal/cmd/alpha/alpha.go#L35).

Author: In-code actions declaration

```suggestion
> For the in-code declaration, see [alpha.go](https://github.com/kyma-project/cli/blob/main/internal/cmd/alpha/alpha.go#L36-L42).
```

All templates start with the `${{` prefix and end with the `}}` suffix. For example:

```yaml
name: ${{ .flags.name.value }}
```

### Custom Functions

| Function | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **newLineIndent** | Adds given indent to string if it's multiline | `source: ${{ .flags.source.value \| newLineIndent 20 }}` |
| **toEnvs** | Converts the input data map to array of Kubernetes-like envs | `envs: ${{ .flags.env.value \| toEnvs }}` |
| **toArray** | Converts the input data map to an array in a given format. Use `{{.key}}` and `{{.value}}` to access map data | `secretMounts: ${{ .flags.secretmount.value \| toArray "{'secretName':'{{.key}}','mountPath':'{{.value}}'}" }}` |

## Available Resource-Oriented Actions

| Name | Description |
| --- | --- |
| **resource_create** | Creates a resource on a cluster |
| **resource_get** | Gets a resource from a cluster |
| **resource_delete** | Deletes a resource from a cluster |
| **resource_explain** | Explains a resource by displaying info about it |

### resource_create

Use this action to create any resource on the cluster.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml

> resource: {}

Reviewer 2: Dots are good enough for me.

| **registry_config** | `docker-registry` | Get in-cluster registry configuration |
| **function_init** | `serverless` | Generate Function's source and dependencies locally |

### registry_image_import

Action designed for the `docker-registry` module to import image from a local registry to the in-cluster docker registry.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
image: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **image** | string | Image from local registry to import in format \<image\>:\<tag\> |

### registry_config

Action designed for the `docker-registry` module to get in-cluster Docker Config JSON.

**Action configuration:**

```yaml
pushRegAddrOnly: false
pullRegAddrOnly: false
output: "..."
useExternal: false
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **pushRegAddrOnly** | bool | Return the push registry address only |
| **pullRegAddrOnly** | bool | Return the pull registry address only |
| **output** | string | Path to the file to write output to insead of printing it on the terminal |
| **useExternal** | bool | Use extenal configuration instead of internal one |

### function_init

> Action designed for the `serverless` module to init local workspace with hello world functions files with handler and dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action designed for the `serverless` module to init local workspace with hello world Functions files with handler and dependencies.
```

```yaml
useRuntime: "..."
outputDir: "..."
runtimes:
  <runtime>:
    depsFilename: "..."
    depsData: "..."
    handlerFilename: "..."
    handlerData: "..."
```

**Fields:**

| Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **useRuntime** | string | Desired runtime to generate workspace for |

> | **outputDir** | string | Path to the output directory where workspace will be generated |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **outputDir** | string | Path to the output directory where the workspace is generated |
```

> | **runtimes** | map | Map of awailable runtimes from which workspace will be generated by using the `useRuntime` field |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **runtimes** | map | Map of available runtimes from which workspace is generated by using the `useRuntime` field |
```
